[WAKI] I am a priest living at Urin-in in Murasakino,
in the Northern hills of the capital.
I have offered flowers throughout the summer.
As my period of retreat is coming to a close,
I will gather fine blossoms
and perform a memorial service for the flowers.
[WAKI] With reverence, I proclaim this memorial service for flowers.
Though they are said to be insentient plants,
these flowers blossom in wide woodlands.
How could they be said to be without feelings?
Especially the lotus appearing from the mud
and that has become the title of the one sublime law.
Drawn by this time even plants, trees,
all the earth, achieve Buddhahood.
[SHITE] As when the hand takes them,
the hand itself sullies them.
To the Buddhas of the Three Realms
I offer them as they are.
[WAKI] How strange! Until now
I saw them only as flowers grasses, yet among them
I see a single white flower whose brows seem
to unfold in a smile
What manner of flower are you offering ?
[SHITE] A foolish question, holy priest.
Though in this twilight hour you see it,
You do not recognize this flower!
Its name seeming human, on lowly hedges it hangs,
that you do not know its name is reasonable.
This is the 'evening face' flower.
[WAKI] Indeed, it is an "evening face"!
Who is it that has offered this flower?
[SHITE] Without giving my name you will know it in the end.
I have come from this flower's shadow.
[WAKI] So then, are you no longer in the world
and came to attend this memorial service for flowers?
But please, you must tell me your name.
[SHITE] I have a name, though I am no longer alive,
part of an old story.
[WAKI] At a certain mansion,
[SHITE] I could always be found, indeed it is so.
[JIUTAI] Near Gojō, she said, of the "evening face."
Near Gojō, she said, of the "evening face."
In the moment the eyes turn aside, she becomes a dream.
Only her image lingers behind
as she disapperas in the shadow of the flowers.
She disappears in the shadow of the flowers.
[KYŌGEN] I am someone who lives
in the Kitayama area of the capital.
I have heard that near here,
at Unrin-in, there will be memorial services
for the lowers offered over the summer.
This being the case, I too, intend to go there.
Truly, as few people are going there this evening,
it is rather melancholy.
[WAKI ]Ho, there! Are you someone from around here ?
[KYŌGEN]  Indeed, I am a person from this area.
[WAKI] If that's the case, first of all, could you come closer ?
There is something I would like to ask you.
[KYŌGEN] Certainly.
Well then, what is the matter
you would like to ask me about ?
[WAKI] While it isn't a circumstance of much importance,
I would like you to tell me the particulars of the story of Lady Yūgao,
of the Evening Faces, who lived here long ago.
[KYŌGEN] This is an unexpected request you've made of me.
I don't know about the situation in much detail, but
I will do the best I can to tell you the story as I have heard it.
Well then, the one known as Lady Yūgao was the daughter
of a middle captain of the third rank, and,
owing the certain circumstances,
she came to live in seclusion in the area of Gojo.
Also at the at time, Hikaru Genji
was paying regular visit to the home of Lady Rokujo.
On occasion he would pass through the Gojo area
and it happened that there was a simple dwelling there
with "evening faces" blooming in splendid profusion.
He called Koremitsu to him,
and requested that he go pluck a blossom.
When Koremitsu spoke to his attendant,
a child came out of the house, and,
having asked that he wait there for a wile, soon after,
offered him a white fan, its edges perfumed with incense,
on which rested a blossom of the "evening faces".
The attendant took this and returned with it to Koremitsu.
Koremistu went with it to Genji, who,
seeing then that there was a poem on the edge of the fan,
quickly wrote a verse in reply.
Because of that flower, he was drawn to the Lady Yūgao,
of the evening faces, and as the vows they shared were not shallow,
after that he came to stay together with her there at her dwelling.
Even as the purity of the many pledges
they exchanged were profound-
By the Sacred Treaures! Mysteroiusly,
Lady Yūgao was possessed
by some sort of vengeful spirit, and it is said that all was lost...
As to Hikaru Genji's grief, its depth was limitless
as there was nothing to be done for her, it is said.
In any event, those are the details,
at least in broad terms, as I know them.
But why are you interested in this
and asking me about this matter now ? I find it suspicious.
[WAKI] I'm grateful that you have described the matter so thoroughly.
When I was performing a memorial service for flowers
offered during the summer, a woman appeared
and gave me a white flower.
I asked who, and what sort of person, she was with the flower,
to which she replied speaking of the Lady of the Evening Faces
as though she spoke of herself.
Then she disappeared in the shadow of the flowers.
That's what happened.
[KYŌGEN] How astonishing!
What a wondrous thing you have related to me.
Now then, if I may say what I suppose, it can only be that
when you were performing the memorial service for flowers,
the spirit of the "yugao flower", and also the ghost of Lady Yūgao,
Lady of the Evening Faces, of long ago appeared before you.
This being the case, I believe that due to
the merit emanating from your Reverence,
the spirit of the Lady Yūgao appeared to you in order
to ask that you offer prayers for her deliverance.
If that is the case, you should go now to the Gojo area,
where a miracle will surely occur. Then you should pray earnestly
for her enlightenment as she has requested of you.
[WAKI] As I also believe this to be true,
I will go to the Gojo area and pray there
For the ghost of the Lady Yūgao and her deliverance.
[KYŌGEN] As you will be going there shortly,
I'll follow after your Recerence in a while.
[WAKI] In due time then, I will expect you there.
[KYŌGEN] I'll do as you say.
[WAKI] Following what I was told earlier
I have to go to Gojo to see:
Indeed, the mansion, as in the past,
the dwelling and its evening faces.
Gourds now often empty,
and (Genken's) Yen Yūan's home overgrown with weeds.
[SHITE] Densely closed off by goosefoot,
the evening sun creates mountain shadows,
comes through the window and then leaves.
[JIUTAI] The faint sound of a hidden spring.
Rain dampens Genken's (Yüan Hsien) gate.
[SHITE] But what dampens the sleeves is
dawn on the snow on Mount Lu.
[JIUTAI] Through the east window the limpid moon,
Through the east window the limpid moon,
on the zither stand casts its light.
Beyond the hedge, the autumn mountains.
Such a desolate evening!
[JIUTAI] Indeed, the desolate sound of the wind,
the wicker bamboo fence as in the past.
Please show me your form in a dream
I will pray in earnest for your soul.
[SHITE] The moon, uncertain of the mountain ridge as it went
and disappeared in the sky high above without a trace.
When will they meet again ?
[JIUTAI] Though the mountain dweller's fence has fallen into ruin, from time to time
[SHITE] Show compassion for the wild pink
[JIUTAI] Blossom, if I reaveal the form
[SHITE] Will you pray for my soul ?
[JIUTAI] Certainly, I will.
[SHITE] Thinking, "well then,"  the "evening face"
[JIUTAI] The vine-covered lattice shutter pushes open,
revealing her form as she steps out.
At the sight tears flow without stopping.
[JIUTAI] At that time, Genji
the Middle Captain as he was called,
shared the grass pillow of this "evenig face" for a brief rest.
Through the night they heard from next door
a pilgrim's voice in prayer
about ascending the sacred peak at Miyoshino.
"Save us, holy guide of the way in the future, Maitreya Buddha!", he chanted.
Even now this service has brought back the memory
of that time and unmittingly tears dampen my sleeves.
But more than that, I cannot forget the evening
when Genji first saw this house.
Beckoning to Koremitsu,
"Pick that flower for me," he ordered.
On a white fan, its edges perfumed with incense,
the flower was picked and presented.
[SHITE] Genji, gazing at it intently,
[JIUTAI] "Of you passing in the distance..." he asked
and if I had not answered about the flower
forever we must have remained strangers. We were brought together
by the fan touched by our hands, in a joyous pledge of love.
If from time to time
I visit this dwelling of a homeless fishergirl
not knowing the owner's name, I hope
to be as white foam finding at last the shore, he thought,
and composed a poem.
[JIUTAI] If you pick it
[SHITE] If you pick it
then, indeed you will know it
in the twilight
[JIUTAI] Faintly visible:
The flowering "evening face",
the flowering "evening face",
the flowering "evening face".
[SHITE] "As my final home I have shown you
[JIUTAI] Always pray for me
[SHITE] I beg you", she said, and
[JIUTAI] as she spoke the crowing of the cocks,
[SHITE] The tolling of the bells too,
announce the coming of dawn.
[JIUTAI] As nothing will be hidden in the morning light,
"Before dawn breaks, to the dwelling of the "evening face",
"before dawn breaks, to the dwelling of the "evening face",
she says, and again goes within the lattice shutter,
just so, becoming one with the dream.